.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt NOWLINE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nowline
.Nd create roadmaps using a human readable text file .nowline
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl f Ar format
.Op Fl o Ar path
.Op Fl t Ar theme
.Op Fl -now Ar date
.Op Ar options
.Ar input
.Nm
.Fl -serve
.Op Fl p Ar port
.Op Ar options
.Ar input
.Nm
.Fl -init
.Op Ar name
.Nm
.Fl -dry-run
.Op Ar options
.Ar input
.Nm
.Op Fl V | Fl -version
.Nm
.Op Fl h | Fl -help
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a CLI that processes simple human readable
.Pa .nowline
files that define a roadmap, not a Gantt chart.
The primary artifact is an SVG, but it also generates many other
artifacts including PNG, PDF, HTML, Markdown+Mermaid, XLSX, MS Project
XML.
.Pp
This page documents the CLI.
For the file format, see
.Xr nowline 5 .
.Sh INPUT
The input format is detected from the file extension:
.Pa .nowline
\(-> DSL,
.Pa .json
\(-> AST.
Standard-input input defaults to
.Pa .nowline .
Use
.Fl -input-format
to override for unusual filenames.
.Sh LANGUAGE
A
.Pa .nowline
file is an indentation-significant outline.
Two-space indent is canonical; tabs are accepted but must not be
mixed with spaces in a single file.
Strings are double-quoted; properties are
.Sy key:value
pairs.
Comments use
.Sq //
or
.Sq /* */ .
.Pp
Core keywords:
.Bl -tag -width "person, team" -compact
.It Sy roadmap
The top-level roadmap declaration; one per file.
.It Sy swimlane
A horizontal lane of work (team, area, stream).
.It Sy item
A unit of work, indented under a swimlane.
.It Sy parallel
A block whose children run concurrently.
.It Sy group
A logical bundle of items, rendered together.
.It Sy anchor
A named date on the timeline.
.It Sy milestone
A point-in-time marker that depends on work.
.It Sy person , team
Org vocabulary referenced by
.Sy owner: .
.It Sy label
Reusable tag referenced by
.Sy labels: .
.El
.Pp
Every entity follows a universal shape:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
keyword [id] ["title"] [key:value ...]
.Ed
.Pp
At least one of
.Ar id
or
.Qq Ar title
is required \(em the parser distinguishes them by quoting.
.Pp
Minimal example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline v1
roadmap r "Demo" start:2026-01-06
swimlane platform
  item research "Research" duration:3w
  item build "Build" duration:2w
.Ed
.Pp
See
.Xr nowline 5
.Pq Sy man 5 nowline
for the full grammar, every property, validation rules, and
.Sy include
/ config / style declarations.
.Sh MODE FLAGS
The mode flags below are mutually exclusive.
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl -serve
Run a local live-reload preview server.
Re-parses, re-validates, re-lays-out, and re-renders on every file
change; connected browsers refresh via Server-Sent Events.
Validation errors are shown as an overlay on top of the most recent
successful render.
Opt-in
.Fl o Ar path
also writes the rendered output to disk on each rebuild.
.It Fl -init Op Ar name
Scaffold a starter
.Pa .nowline
file in the current directory.
The positional argument is the project
.Em name ,
not a file path;
.Pa .nowline
is auto-appended if missing.
Default name is
.Sy roadmap .
Existing files are silently overwritten.
.It Fl n , -dry-run
Run the full pipeline (parse + validate + layout + format) but skip the
write step.
Replaces the deprecated
.Sy validate
verb.
Exits 0 on success, 1 on validation error.
Works with any output format \(em
.Nm Ar roadmap.nowline Fl f Ar pdf Fl -dry-run
exercises the entire PDF pipeline without producing a file.
.El
.Sh I/O OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl f , -format Ar fmt
Output format:
.Sy svg , png , pdf , html , mermaid , xlsx , msproj , json , nowline .
Default: inferred from
.Fl o
extension, else
.Pa .nowlinerc
.Sy defaultFormat ,
else
.Sy svg .
.It Fl o , -output Ar path
Output file path.
Use
.Sq -
for standard output (Unix dash convention).
Default:
.Pa <cwd>/<input-base>.<format> .
Existing files are silently overwritten.
.It Fl -input-format Ar fmt
Force input format:
.Sy nowline | json .
Default: inferred from extension; standard input defaults to
.Sy nowline .
.El
.Sh RENDER OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl t , -theme Ar name
.Sy light | dark .
.It Fl -now Ar date
.Sq Now
anchor for the now-line and date math, in
.Pa YYYY-MM-DD
form.
Default: today (the OS calendar date in UTC).
Pass
.Fl -now Sq -
to suppress the now-line entirely.
.It Fl -locale Ar bcp47
BCP-47 language tag for the operator's CLI message output (validator
diagnostics on standard error,
.Fl -help ,
parse errors, verbose logs).
Examples:
.Sy en-US , fr , fr-CA , fr-FR .
.Pp
Nowline keeps two independent locale chains so a French operator
can read errors in French while still rendering an English roadmap
authored by an American teammate (and vice-versa):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Em Content locale Pq baked into the rendered SVG / PDF / etc.
File's
.Sy nowline v1 locale:
directive
\(->
.Fl -locale
\(->
.Ev LC_ALL Ns / Ns Ev LC_MESSAGES Ns / Ns Ev LANG
\(->
.Sy en-US .
The file always wins; the operator's locale only acts as a fallback
when the file declines to declare its own.
.It Em Operator locale Pq stderr / stdout messages
.Fl -locale
\(->
.Ev LC_ALL Ns / Ns Ev LC_MESSAGES Ns / Ns Ev LANG
\(->
.Sy en-US .
Independent of the file directive: a French
.Ev LANG
keeps validator errors in French even when the file says
.Sy locale:en-US .
.El
.Pp
Bundles fall back along the BCP-47 chain
.Pq Sy fr-CA No \(-> Sy fr No \(-> Sy en-US ,
so missing entries are silently filled in.
See
.Pa specs/localization.md
for the resolution matrix.
.It Fl -no-links
Omit link icons from rendered items.
.It Fl s , -scale Ar n
Raster scale factor (PNG only; default 1).
.It Fl -strict
Promote asset / sanitizer warnings to errors.
.It Fl w , -width Ar px
Canvas width in pixels (default 1280).
.It Fl -asset-root Ar dir
Directory from which logo / image assets may be loaded
(default: input file's directory).
.El
.Sh FORMAT-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl -page-size Ar size
PDF page size: preset
.Pq Sy letter , legal , tabloid , ledger , a1 No \(en Sy a5 , b3 No \(en Sy b5 ,
.Sy content
for auto-fit, or
.Sy WxH Ns Em unit
for custom (e.g.
.Sy 8.5x11in , 210x297mm ) .
Default:
.Sy letter .
.It Fl -orientation Ar name
PDF orientation:
.Sy portrait | landscape | auto .
Default:
.Sy auto .
.It Fl -margin Ar length
PDF page margin.
Bare numbers are points; length suffixes
.Pq Sy in , mm , cm
are accepted.
Default:
.Sy 36pt
(1/2 inch).
.It Fl -font-sans Ar ref
Sans font for PNG/PDF: TTF/OTF path, or alias
.Pq Sy sf , helvetica , dejavu , ... .
Default: platform probe \(-> bundled DejaVu fallback.
.It Fl -font-mono Ar ref
Monospace font for PNG/PDF; same resolution chain as
.Fl -font-sans .
.It Fl -headless
Skip the platform font probe and force the bundled DejaVu pair.
Output is byte-stable across machines.
.It Fl -start Ar date
MS Project: anchor date
.Pq Pa YYYY-MM-DD
for relative-only roadmaps.
Default:
.Fl -now ,
then deterministic fallback.
.El
.Sh SERVE OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl p , -port Ar n
Port to bind (default 4318).
.It Fl -host Ar host
Bind address (default
.Sy 127.0.0.1 ;
use
.Sy 0.0.0.0
to expose on the LAN).
.It Fl -open
Open the browser on start.
.El
.Sh LOGGING OPTIONS
The logging flags are mutually exclusive.
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl v , -verbose
Print extra diagnostics to standard error (config path, pipeline
timings, font resolution, fallback decisions).
.It Fl q , -quiet
Suppress non-error standard error.
.El
.Sh STANDARD OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl h , -help
Print help to standard output and exit 0.
.It Fl V , -version
Print version to standard output and exit 0.
.El
.Pp
.Fl V
(uppercase) is
.Fl -version ;
lowercase
.Fl v
is
.Fl -verbose ,
matching
.Xr curl 1
and
.Xr ssh 1 .
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ev
.It Ev LC_ALL , LC_MESSAGES , LANG
Operator locale fallback when
.Fl -locale
is absent.
First non-empty value wins, in the order listed.
POSIX-style suffixes
.Pq Sq .UTF-8 , Sq @euro
are stripped and the result is normalized to BCP-47.
.Pp
Affects the operator chain
.Pq stderr / stdout, validator diagnostics, --help, errors, verbose logs
unconditionally.
Affects the content chain
.Pq rendered axis labels, now-pill, quarter prefix
only when the file does not declare its own
.Sy nowline v1 locale:
directive — the file directive always wins for the rendered
artifact.
See
.Pa specs/localization.md
for the resolution matrix.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa .nowlinerc
Optional JSON or YAML configuration file.
Walked up from the input file's directory; nearest one wins.
CLI flags override config values.
Recognized keys:
.Sy theme , defaultFormat , width , pdfPageSize , pdfOrientation ,
.Sy pdfMargin , fontSans , fontMono , headlessFonts , locale .
Unknown keys are ignored.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Validation error (parse failure, invalid reference, etc.).
.It 2
Usage error (missing input, bad flags, mutually-exclusive flags,
unsupported format, file not found, binary output to TTY, unreadable
input).
.It 3
Output error (cannot write to destination, exporter pipeline failure).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Render the default SVG to the current directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline roadmap.nowline
.Ed
.Pp
Render to a different format; format inferred from
.Fl o
extension:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline roadmap.nowline -f pdf
nowline roadmap.nowline -o roadmap.pdf
nowline roadmap.nowline -f png --scale 3
.Ed
.Pp
Stream SVG to standard output, validate, and live-preview:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline roadmap.nowline -o -
nowline roadmap.nowline --dry-run
nowline roadmap.nowline --serve -p 8080
.Ed
.Pp
Read from standard input; convert text \(<-\(-> JSON AST:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cat roadmap.nowline | nowline -
nowline roadmap.nowline -f json -o roadmap.json
nowline roadmap.json -f nowline -o roadmap.nowline
.Ed
.Pp
Scaffold a new file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline --init
nowline --init my-project
.Ed
.Pp
PDF with explicit page geometry, byte-stable across machines:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline roadmap.nowline -f pdf --page-size a4 \\
    --orientation landscape --margin 0.5in --headless
.Ed
.Pp
Read errors and diagnostics in French while rendering whatever
locale the file declares:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline roadmap.nowline --locale fr-CA
.Ed
.Pp
Set the rendered artifact's locale at the file level so it stays
French no matter who runs
.Nm :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline v1 locale:fr-CA
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nowline 5
.Pq Sy man 5 nowline
.Pp
.Lk https://github.com/lolay/nowline "Source code, issues, and full DSL reference"
.Pp
The
.Sy specs/
directory in the source repository documents the DSL grammar
.Pq Pa specs/dsl.md ,
the layout / rendering pipeline
.Pq Pa specs/rendering.md ,
the CLI surface
.Pq Pa specs/cli.md ,
and OSS milestones
.Pq Pa specs/milestones.md .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An The Nowline Authors Aq Mt maintainers@nowline.io
