.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt NOWLINE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nowline
.Nd Nowline DSL roadmap file format
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Pa .nowline
file is an indentation-significant outline that defines a roadmap, not
a Gantt chart.
The file itself is the product; every other artifact (SVG, PNG, PDF,
HTML, Markdown+Mermaid, XLSX, MS Project XML) is a view of it produced
by
.Xr nowline 1 .
.Pp
This page documents the file format.
For the rendering pipeline and visual contracts, see
.Pa specs/rendering.md
in the source repository.
For the CLI surface, see
.Xr nowline 1 .
.Pp
The canonical, prose source for everything below is
.Pa specs/dsl.md
in the source repository; this page is a hand-authored reference
distilled from it.
.Sh FILE STRUCTURE
A
.Pa .nowline
file has up to four sections in strict order:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
.Sy nowline
directive (optional, recommended). Must be the first non-comment,
non-blank line if present.
.It
.Sy include
declarations (optional). Pull in other
.Pa .nowline
files.
.It
.Sy config
section (optional). Rendering configuration: styles, defaults,
scale, calendar, symbols.
.It
.Sy roadmap
section (required). Content: persons, teams, anchors, labels, sizes,
statuses, swimlanes, items, milestones, footnotes.
.El
.Pp
.Sy config
and
.Sy roadmap
are section markers, not indent-containers.
Keywords inside each section appear at the top level (not indented
under the marker).
Indentation is used where nesting is real: style properties under a
.Sy style
block, items under a
.Sy swimlane ,
team members under a
.Sy team .
.Pp
Indentation is significant.
Two-space indent is canonical; one tab is also accepted.
Spaces and tabs must not be mixed inside a single file \(em the
parser rejects mixed indentation with an error identifying the first
offending line.
.Pp
Strings are double-quoted
.Pq Qq Auth refactor ,
not bare or single-quoted.
Properties are
.Sy key:value
pairs on the same line as the entity; values containing spaces must
be double-quoted.
Property keys never use
.Sq = .
.Pp
Built-in keywords and property names are kebab-case
.Pq Sy capacity-icon , Sy days-per-week , Sy in-progress .
Author-chosen identifiers may use any combination of letters,
digits, underscores, and dashes
.Pq Sy auth-refactor , Sy authRefactor , Sy auth_refactor ;
they must start with a letter or underscore.
.Pp
Comments use
.Sq //
for single-line and
.Sq /* */
for multi-line.
A trailing
.Sq \e
continues a line; indentation on the continuation line is cosmetic.
Use
.Sq \e\e
for a literal backslash.
.Sh DIRECTIVE
The
.Sy nowline
directive declares which DSL major version a file targets:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline v1
.Ed
.Pp
The version is integer-only
.Pq Sy v1 , Sy v2 , Sy v3 , ...
and is independent of the npm package version.
Within a DSL major, the parser must accept every valid file written
for that major; new syntax may be added between package minor/patch
releases, but no breaking change to an existing valid
.Sy nowline v1
file ships without bumping the directive to
.Sy v2 .
When the parser encounters a version newer than it supports, it
emits an error identifying the required version.
When the directive is omitted, the parser assumes the latest
version it supports.
.Pp
The directive line accepts optional file-level properties after the
version.
The only directive property today is
.Sy locale: ,
a BCP-47 tag controlling localized rendering and validator
messages:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline v1 locale:fr-CA
.Ed
.Pp
Unknown directive keys are an error so typos surface immediately.
See
.Pa specs/localization.md
for the locale model and precedence chain.
.Pp
The
.Sy nowline
directive is the only construct that does not follow the universal
declaration pattern
.Pq see Sx GRAMMAR :
no identifier, no title, just the keyword and version.
.Sh INCLUDES
.Sy include
pulls another
.Pa .nowline
file into the current file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
include "shared/teams.nowline"
include "brand-styles.nowline" roadmap:ignore
include "partner.nowline" config:isolate roadmap:isolate
.Ed
.Pp
Two optional properties \(em
.Sy config:
and
.Sy roadmap:
\(em control how the included file's content is handled.
They operate on two independent categories:
.Bl -tag -width "Roadmap (content)"
.It Sy Config
The included file's
.Sy scale ,
.Sy style ,
.Sy symbol ,
.Sy default ,
and
.Sy calendar
declarations.
.It Sy Roadmap
The included file's
.Sy roadmap
declaration plus all its content (persons, teams, anchors, labels,
sizes, statuses, swimlanes, items, milestones, footnotes).
.El
.Pp
.Sy config:
modes:
.Bl -tag -width "isolate"
.It Sy merge Pq default
Child config items are merged into the parent.
On collision, the
.Em parent wins
and the parser emits a warning identifying the shadowed definition
and source file.
.It Sy ignore
Child config is dropped entirely.
If child roadmap content is merged, it resolves styles from the
parent's post-merge config.
.It Sy isolate
Child config is only available within the child file; parent config
is only available in the parent.
Neither side bleeds into the other.
.El
.Pp
.Sy roadmap:
modes:
.Bl -tag -width "isolate"
.It Sy merge Pq default
Child content entities are merged into the parent.
On collision,
.Em parent wins
and a warning is emitted.
A swimlane collision drops the swimlane's contained items as well.
Merged content resolves styles from the post-merge config.
.It Sy ignore
Child content is dropped.
Use for shared style libraries
.Pq Sy include "brand.nowline" roadmap:ignore .
Shared label, status, and size vocabulary uses
.Sy roadmap:merge ,
not
.Sy roadmap:ignore .
.It Sy isolate
Child content stays scoped to the child file and uses only the
child's config.
The child must contain a
.Sy roadmap
declaration (needed for the region label).
The isolated content renders as a visually distinct region with its
own border.
.El
.Pp
Includes are processed depth-first, in file order.
When the processor encounters an
.Sy include ,
it processes that child (and its includes recursively) before
continuing with the next declaration.
Config is merged before roadmap content at each level.
.Pp
Diamond includes (A includes B and C, both include D) are valid;
D is processed once on first encounter.
Duplicate includes of the same file in a single file are an error.
Circular includes are an error.
.Pp
Includes are resolved relative to the including file's directory.
Paths use forward slashes on all platforms.
Includes must appear before
.Sy config
and
.Sy roadmap
\(em they are the first declarations in a file (after the optional
.Sy nowline
directive).
.Pp
For any include whose
.Sy roadmap:
mode is not
.Sy ignore ,
if the child file declares a
.Sy roadmap ,
the parent and child must agree on
.Sy start: \(em
both absent, or both present with identical values.
A mismatch is an error reported on the parent's
.Sy include
line; this is an explicit exception to the
.Qq parent wins
merge behaviour because
.Sy start:
defines the shared timeline baseline.
.Sh CONFIG SECTION
The optional
.Sy config
section marker appears before
.Sy roadmap .
Config keywords sit at the top level (not indented under the
marker) and define rendering vocabulary, defaults, axis settings,
day arithmetic, and custom symbols.
.Pp
Five config keywords:
.Sy scale ,
.Sy style ,
.Sy symbol ,
.Sy default ,
.Sy calendar .
Every config entry is optional; if
.Sy config
is omitted, all built-in defaults apply.
.Ss style \(em named visual definition
A
.Sy style
declares a named visual treatment.
Properties are indented beneath:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
style enterprise "Enterprise readiness"
  bg: blue
  fg: navy
  text: white
  border: solid
  icon: shield

style risky
  border: dashed
  fg: orange
.Ed
.Pp
Styles follow the universal
.Sy [id] ["title"]
pattern.
Properties are listed under
.Sx STYLE PROPERTIES
below.
.Ss symbol \(em custom named symbol
A
.Sy symbol
declares a custom symbol for use by
.Sy icon:
and
.Sy capacity-icon:
style properties.
Authors use the inline Unicode-literal form
.Pq Sy capacity-icon:"\(rs"
for one-off symbols; named
.Sy symbol
declarations are for reusable ones.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
symbol budget "Budget" unicode:"\(em" ascii:"$"
symbol fte unicode:"\eu{1F464}" ascii:"@"
symbol star unicode:"\(em"
.Ed
.Pp
Required:
.Sy unicode:"<string>"
\(em the Unicode character (literal or
.Sy \eu{...}
escape, may be a multi-codepoint grapheme cluster).
.Pp
Optional:
.Sy ascii:"<string>"
\(em short ASCII fallback for terminals lacking the glyph,
\(<= 3 ASCII characters; defaults to
.Sq \&?
when omitted.
.Pp
A
.Sy symbol
id must not shadow a built-in icon name
.Pq Sy none , Sy multiplier , Sy person , Sy people , Sy points , Sy time , Sy shield , Sy warning , Sy lock .
.Ss default \(em default property values per entity type
.Sy default <entity> <properties>
sets default property values for a given entity type.
One declaration per entity type per file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
default item status:planned shadow:subtle
default label style:subtle corner-radius:full
default swimlane padding:sm spacing:none
default roadmap padding:md header-height:md font:sans
default milestone weight:bold
default footnote style:subtle shadow:subtle
default anchor style:subtle
default parallel bracket:none
default group padding:xs spacing:xs
.Ed
.Pp
Supported entity types:
.Sy item , label , swimlane , roadmap , parallel , group , milestone , footnote , anchor .
When an entity omits a property, the matching default applies;
explicit values on the entity always override defaults.
.Pp
Identity-defining, sizing, sequencing, reference, and prose
properties cannot be defaulted because they must be explicit per
entity.
Banned, by entity type:
.Bl -tag -width "default footnote"
.It Sy default item
.Sy size , duration , after , before , remaining , link , description , owner .
.It Sy default milestone
.Sy date , after , link , description .
.It Sy default anchor
.Sy date , link , description .
.It Sy default footnote
.Sy on , link , description .
.El
.Pp
Raw style properties
.Pq Sy bg , Sy fg , Sy text , Sy border , Sy shadow , ...
are allowed on
.Sy default
because
.Sy default
lives in
.Sy config ,
the presentation section.
The ban on raw style properties applies to roadmap-section
entities, not to
.Sy default
lines.
.Pp
.Sy capacity
is allowed on
.Sy default item
but
.Em not
on
.Sy default swimlane
\(em each lane's budget is intentionally explicit at its declaration
site.
.Sy utilization-warn-at: ,
.Sy utilization-over-at: ,
and
.Sy capacity-icon:
are allowed on both
.Sy default swimlane
and
.Sy default item
per the usual presentation-property rule.
.Ss scale \(em axis display
.Sy scale
configures the timeline axis.
Column width is set by
.Sy scale:<duration>
on the
.Sy roadmap
declaration; this block configures display:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
scale
  name: sprints
  label-every: 2
  label: "Sprint {n}"
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width "label-every"
.It Sy name
Display label for the scale unit (e.g.
.Qq sprint ) .
Defaults to an auto-generated name based on the roadmap's
.Sy scale:
duration.
.It Sy label-every
Show an axis label every Nth column.
Defaults to the renderer's choice.
.It Sy label
Axis label format.
.Sq {n}
is the column index.
.El
.Pp
The
.Sy scale
config block is optional.
A file can declare
.Sy scale:2w
on its
.Sy roadmap
with no
.Sy scale
block and the renderer picks all display defaults.
.Ss calendar \(em day arithmetic
The
.Sy calendar:
property on
.Sy roadmap
selects day-arithmetic mode:
.Bl -tag -width "calendar:business"
.It Sy calendar:business Pq default
Engineering working-day arithmetic.
.Sy days-per-week:5 ,
.Sy days-per-month:22 ,
.Sy days-per-quarter:65 ,
.Sy days-per-year:260 .
.It Sy calendar:full
Calendar-day arithmetic with weekends.
.Sy days-per-week:7 ,
.Sy days-per-month:30 ,
.Sy days-per-quarter:90 ,
.Sy days-per-year:365 .
.It Sy calendar:custom
Author-supplied values via the
.Sy calendar
config block.
.El
.Pp
A
.Sy calendar
config block is only meaningful when
.Sy roadmap
declares
.Sy calendar:custom .
When custom, all four
.Sy days-per-*
fields are required:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
config

calendar
  days-per-week: 6
  days-per-month: 26
  days-per-quarter: 78
  days-per-year: 312

roadmap rotating-shift "Rotating Shift" calendar:custom
.Ed
.Pp
All four entries must be positive integers.
There is no partial form.
.Pp
Each
.Sy days-per-*
field is independently defined: a duration like
.Sy 1y
resolves to
.Sy days-per-year
directly, not by multiplying through months or weeks.
This is why business mode's
.Sy 1y
is
.Sy 260d ,
not
.Sy 12 \(mu 22d = 264d .
.Sh ROADMAP SECTION
The
.Sy roadmap
section marker is required and appears exactly once per file.
Roadmap keywords sit at the top level (not indented under the
marker) and form the content of the file.
.Pp
The
.Sy roadmap
declaration line itself accepts:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
roadmap platform-2026 "Platform 2026" \e
    author:"Acme" \e
    start:2026-01-06 \e
    scale:2w \e
    calendar:business \e
    logo:"./brand/acme.svg" \e
    logo-size:md
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width "calendar:"
.It Sy author:
Free-form string.
.It Sy start:
ISO date
.Pq Pa YYYY-MM-DD ,
the timeline baseline.
Required if any
.Sy anchor
or any dated
.Sy milestone
exists.
Every anchor date and dated milestone date must be on or after
.Sy start: .
.It Sy scale:
Raw duration literal for column width
.Pq Sy 2w , Sy 1q ;
defaults to
.Sy 1w .
.It Sy calendar:
.Sy business | full | custom .
Defaults to
.Sy business .
.It Sy logo:
Path to a logo file
.Pq Sy .svg , Sy .png , Sy .jpg / Sy .jpeg , Sy .webp ,
resolved relative to the
.Pa .nowline
file's directory.
Forward slashes on all platforms; only local paths are accepted.
Asset resolution happens at render time, not parse time \(em a file
referencing a missing logo is still a valid document.
.It Sy logo-size:
Size preset
.Pq Sy xs | sm | md | lg | xl ,
default
.Sy md .
.El
.Pp
Twelve roadmap-section keywords:
.Sy swimlane , item , parallel , group ,
.Sy person , team , anchor , label , size , status , milestone ,
.Sy footnote .
Each follows the universal
.Sy [id] ["title"] [key:value...]
pattern.
.Ss swimlane \(em group items by team / area / stream
.Bd -literal -offset indent
swimlane platform owner:platform capacity:5
  item auth-refactor "Auth refactor" size:l after:kickoff
  item platform-qa "Platform QA" size:s capacity:2
.Ed
.Pp
Items, parallels, and groups are indented beneath.
Properties:
.Bl -tag -width "utilization-over-at"
.It Sy owner:
Person or team id.
.It Sy capacity:
Per-timestep budget.
Integer or decimal only; no percent form.
.It Sy utilization-warn-at: , Sy utilization-over-at:
Thresholds for the lane utilization underline.
Each accepts a percent literal
.Pq Sy 80% ,
a positive decimal interpreted as a fraction
.Pq Sy 0.8 ,
or the bareword
.Sy none
to opt out of that color band.
Defaults
.Sy 80%
and
.Sy 100% .
When both numeric thresholds are set,
.Sy warn-at \(<= over-at .
.El
.Ss item \(em work item
Items live inside swimlanes (or
.Sy parallel /
.Sy group
blocks) and must declare at least one of
.Sy size:
or
.Sy duration: .
See
.Sx ITEM PROPERTIES
below.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
swimlane platform
  item auth-refactor "Auth refactor" size:l status:done
  item "Quick cleanup" size:s
  item sso size:m
.Ed
.Ss parallel \(em parallel execution block
.Sy parallel
runs its children in parallel.
Children can be bare items or groups.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
swimlane platform
  item auth "Auth refactor" size:l
  parallel
    item api-v2 "API v2" size:m
    item sdk-update "SDK update" size:s
  item integration "Integration" size:s
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy api-v2
and
.Sy sdk-update
start at the same time (after
.Sy auth
finishes).
When the
.Sy parallel
block ends, the next sibling
.Pq Sy integration
waits for all parallel children to complete (implicit join on
dedent).
A
.Sy parallel
block must contain at least 2 children; a single-child parallel
emits a warning.
.Ss group \(em sequential item bundle
.Sy group
bundles items into a named sequential track.
Inside a swimlane (outside a parallel block), the group is
sequential with respect to its siblings.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
swimlane platform
  group api-work "API Work" labels:enterprise
    item api-v2 "API v2" size:m
    item api-docs "API docs" size:s
  item deploy "Deploy" size:s
.Ed
.Pp
A
.Sy group
with
.Sy style: ,
.Sy labels: ,
or other visual properties renders with a visible bounding box
plus a small title chiclet.
A
.Sy group
with no styling is purely structural \(em it only governs
sequencing and inner row growth, with no visible artifact.
.Ss anchor \(em named date on the timeline
.Bd -literal -offset indent
anchor kickoff date:2026-01-06
anchor code-freeze "Code Freeze" date:2026-05-01
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy date:
is required.
Anchors are referenced by
.Sy after:
and
.Sy before:
on items, parallels, groups, and milestones to pin their position.
.Ss label \(em semantic tag / chip vocabulary
Labels live in the roadmap section so content and vocabulary live
together; visual defaults live in
.Sy config
via
.Sy default label
and referenced
.Sy style
blocks.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
label enterprise "Enterprise readiness" style:enterprise
label security "Security hardening" style:enterprise-red
label low-confidence style:risky-dotted
.Ed
.Pp
A
.Sy label
line accepts
.Sy style:id
plus universal properties
.Pq Sy labels: , Sy link: , description .
Raw style properties are
.Em not
allowed on a
.Sy label
line.
Labels used on items without a matching
.Sy label
declaration are valid; they render with chip defaults from
.Sy default label
or system defaults.
.Ss size \(em named effort budget
A
.Sy size
maps a named t-shirt size to a single-engineer effort budget.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
size xs "Extra Small" effort:0.5d
size s "Small" effort:3d
size m "Medium" effort:1w
size l "Large" effort:2w
size xl "Extra Large" effort:1m
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy effort:
is required and must be a positive raw duration literal
.Pq decimal-aware: Sy 0.5d , Sy 1.5w .
The id must not match the raw duration pattern
.Sy \&\ed+(\e.\ed+)?[dwmqy]
or be a bare
.Sy d , w , m , q , y
\(em this avoids ambiguity at the call site.
.Pp
On items, the on-bar size chip renders the size's optional
.Sy title
when provided, falling back to the id verbatim.
.Sy size m "M" effort:1w
renders
.Qq M ;
.Sy size m effort:1w
renders
.Qq m .
.Pp
.Sy size
declarations must precede any item that references them.
.Ss status \(em custom status value
.Bd -literal -offset indent
status awaiting-review "Awaiting Review"
status in-review "In Review"
status deferred "Deferred"
.Ed
.Pp
Extends the built-in set
.Po
.Sy planned ,
.Sy in-progress
.Pq alias Sy active ,
.Sy done
.Pq alias Sy completed ,
.Sy at-risk ,
.Sy blocked
.Pc .
The aliases canonicalize at the layout boundary; both spellings
are valid input.
.Pp
Custom statuses have no inherent semantics beyond what renderers
assign; the DSL only guarantees the value resolves and can carry
a display title.
Renderers may map custom statuses to visual treatments via
.Sy default item style:...
or entity-level
.Sy style:
overrides.
.Pp
.Sy status
declarations must precede any entity that references them.
.Ss milestone \(em achievement marker
.Bd -literal -offset indent
milestone v1-ga "v1 GA" date:2026-06-30
milestone beta "Beta" after:auth-refactor
milestone v1-ga "v1 GA" after:[core-api, audit-log]
milestone v1-ga "v1 GA" date:2026-06-30 after:[core-api, audit-log]
.Ed
.Pp
At least one of
.Sy date:
or
.Sy after:
is required.
With both, the
.Sy date:
is an intended target, not a hard cap; slippage (dependencies not
converging by the target date) is a rendering concern, not a
validation error.
.Ss footnote \(em attachable annotation
.Bd -literal -offset indent
footnote "Vendor dependency" on:audit-log
  description "Blocked until vendor contract is signed."

footnote capacity-risk "Team capacity risk" on:[mobile, platform]
  description "Both teams are understaffed through Q2."
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy on:
is required and references one or more identifiers (item,
swimlane, anchor, milestone, person, team).
Use bracket notation for multiples:
.Sy on:[id1, id2] .
Footnotes are numbered sequentially by document order; a
superscript number appears on every entity the footnote attaches
to.
.Ss person and team \(em organisational vocabulary
.Bd -literal -offset indent
person sam "Sam Chen" link:https://github.com/samchen
person jen "Jennifer Wu"

team engineering "Engineering"
  team platform "Platform Team"
    person sam
    person jen
  team mobile "Mobile Team"
.Ed
.Pp
A
.Sy person
may be declared at the roadmap top level or nested inside a
.Sy team .
.Bl -tag -width "person <id>"
.It Sy person <id>
Bare reference.
Inside a
.Sy team
it denotes membership.
At the roadmap top level it is a no-op (parser may emit a
warning).
.It Sy person <id> ["title"] [properties]
Declaration.
Creates the person.
If nested inside a
.Sy team ,
the declaration also establishes membership.
.El
.Pp
Person identifiers are global within the merged file scope
regardless of where they are declared.
A person may be declared at most once in the merged scope;
duplicate declarations are an error.
.Pp
.Sy team
nesting inside another
.Sy team
is always a declaration.
Teams cannot be referenced with a bare
.Sy team <id>
line.
.Pp
Both
.Sy person
and
.Sy team
support
.Sy link:
and the
.Sy description
sub-directive.
.Sh UNIVERSAL PROPERTIES
These properties are valid on every entity type: items, swimlanes,
parallel blocks, groups, milestones, anchors, persons, teams,
labels, sizes, statuses, footnotes.
.Bl -tag -width "description"
.It Sy labels:
List.
Tags for filtering and display.
.Sy labels:enterprise
or
.Sy labels:[enterprise, security] .
On an item, each label renders as an atomic chiclet inside the
bar.
.It Sy link:
Bare URL (no quotes).
One link per entity.
.It Sy style:
Identifier.
Single reference to a named style declared in
.Sy config .
This is the only visual property allowed on a roadmap-section
entity.
.It Sy description
Sub-directive.
Indented under the entity.
Longer explanatory text:
.Sy description "Details here" .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Content vs. rendering separation .
Entities in the roadmap section carry only semantic information
plus an optional single
.Sy style:id
reference.
Raw style properties
.Po
.Sy bg , Sy fg , Sy text , Sy border , Sy icon , Sy shadow ,
.Sy font , Sy weight , Sy italic , Sy text-size , Sy padding ,
.Sy spacing , Sy header-height , Sy corner-radius , Sy bracket ,
.Sy capacity-icon , Sy timeline-position , Sy minor-grid
.Pc
may only appear in
.Sy style
blocks and
.Sy default <entity>
lines \(em both of which live in
.Sy config .
.Sh ITEM PROPERTIES
.Sy status , owner , after ,
and
.Sy before
are also valid on swimlanes, parallel blocks, and groups.
The rest are item-only.
.Bl -tag -width "remaining"
.It Sy status:
Built-in:
.Sy planned ,
.Sy in-progress
.Pq alias Sy active ,
.Sy done
.Pq alias Sy completed ,
.Sy at-risk ,
.Sy blocked .
Custom:
.Sy status:awaiting-review
matching a
.Sy status
declaration.
.It Sy owner:
Person or team id.
Singular \(em one accountable owner.
.It Sy after:
Identifier or bracketed list.
The entity starts after the referenced entity finishes.
.Sy after:[a, b]
starts after the latest finisher.
Accepts item, milestone, anchor, parallel, or group ids.
.It Sy before:
Identifier or bracketed list.
The entity must finish before the referenced entity starts.
.Sy before:[a, b]
finishes before the earliest starter.
.It Sy size:
Size alias.
.Sy size:l
references a
.Sy size
declaration; the item's calendar duration is
.Sy effort \(di item_capacity
.Pq Sy capacity:
defaults to
.Sy 1
when absent.
Items only \(em not valid on
.Sy parallel
or
.Sy group .
.It Sy duration:
Raw duration literal only
.Pq Sy 2w , Sy 3m , Sy 0.5d ;
no alias names.
.Sy size:
is the alias mechanism.
When set alongside
.Sy size: ,
.Sy duration:
wins for bar width and meta-line driver (size chip omitted).
Items only.
.It Sy remaining:
Work remaining.
Two equivalent forms: percent
.Pq Sy remaining:30%
or single-eng effort literal
.Pq Sy remaining:1w , Sy remaining:0.5d .
A literal is normalized to a percent during layout.
Both forms render identically.
.Sy status:done
takes priority.
Items only.
.It Sy capacity:
Concurrent capacity consumed by this item while it runs.
Positive integer
.Pq Sy capacity:2 ,
decimal
.Pq Sy capacity:0.5 ,
or percent literal
.Pq Sy capacity:50%
which parses to a decimal.
Items only.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Required properties .
.Sy item
declarations must include at least one of
.Sy size:
or
.Sy duration: .
.Sy anchor
declarations require
.Sy date: .
.Sy milestone
declarations require at least one of
.Sy date:
or
.Sy after: .
.Sy footnote
declarations require
.Sy on: .
Omitting a required property is a validation error that names the
entity by id or title.
.Sh CAPACITY
.Sy capacity:
is an optional annotation that models per-timestep throughput.
Both swimlanes and items may declare it, and the two annotations
are fully independent \(em neither requires the other.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
swimlane platform capacity:5
  item auth size:l capacity:2
  parallel
    item api size:m capacity:2
    item sdk size:m capacity:1
  item qa size:s capacity:50%
.Ed
.Pp
The unit is opaque to the DSL: authors decide whether
.Sy 5
means engineers, story points, FTE, hours, or any other measure
.Pq same opacity contract as Sy size:l until a Sy size declaration gives it meaning .
.Pp
Where it can appear:
.Bl -tag -width "swimlane"
.It Sy swimlane
Integer or decimal only (no percent form).
The lane's per-timestep budget.
.It Sy item
Integer, decimal, or percent literal.
The item's concurrent consumption.
.It Sy parallel , Sy group
Not valid \(em derived from children (sum at each timestep across
parallel; pass-through for group).
Same exclusion family as
.Sy size , duration , remaining .
.El
.Pp
Default capacity:
.Bl -tag -width "Duration-literal items"
.It Sy Sized items
.Sy size:
declared, no explicit
.Sy capacity: \(em
capacity defaults to
.Sy 1
in both duration derivation
.Pq Sy duration = effort \(di 1 = effort
and overload accounting.
.It Sy Duration-literal items
.Sy duration:
declared, no
.Sy size: ,
no explicit
.Sy capacity: \(em
capacity stays unset and the item contributes
.Sy 0
to overload (uncounted).
The literal duration is the bar width regardless.
.It Sy Explicit Sy capacity:N
Always wins for both purposes.
.El
.Pp
Lifetime: capacity is constant for the item's full duration.
No ramps in
.Sy v1 .
.Pp
.Sy Utilization thresholds .
Swimlanes that declare
.Sy capacity:
paint a tri-state utilization underline (green / yellow / red)
along the bottom of the band based on the per-timestep load
function
.Sy f(x) = \(*S items[i].capacity for items active at x .
.Bl -tag -width "utilization-over-at"
.It Sy utilization-warn-at:N% Pq default Sy 80%
At or above this fraction of
.Sy capacity: ,
the segment paints
.Sy yellow .
.It Sy utilization-over-at:N% Pq default Sy 100%
At or above this fraction of
.Sy capacity: ,
the segment paints
.Sy red .
.El
.Pp
Below
.Sy warn-at
the segment paints
.Sy green .
Both thresholds accept the literal value
.Sy none
to opt out of that color band:
.Sy utilization-warn-at:none
collapses to a binary green/red indicator;
.Sy utilization-over-at:none
removes red entirely; setting both to
.Sy none
suppresses the underline outright.
.Sh SIZING PRECEDENCE
When an item declares both
.Sy size:
and
.Sy duration: ,
the explicit
.Sy duration:
literal wins for bar width and the meta line: the size chip is
not shown (only the literal appears as the driver token).
.Bl -column -offset indent "size:" "duration:" "capacity:" "Resulting duration"
.It Sy size: Ta Sy duration: Ta Sy capacity: Ta Resulting duration
.It l Ta \(em Ta \(em Ta size.l.effort \(di 1 (e.g. 2w)
.It l Ta \(em Ta 2 Ta size.l.effort \(di 2 (e.g. 1w)
.It l Ta 2w Ta 2 Ta 2w (literal wins; no chip)
.It \(em Ta 2w Ta 2 Ta 2w (capacity does not divide a literal)
.It \(em Ta \(em Ta \(em Ta validation error
.El
.Sh STYLE PROPERTIES
Properties valid inside a
.Sy style
block (and on
.Sy default <entity>
lines):
.Bl -tag -width "timeline-position"
.It Sy bg
Background/fill color or
.Sy none .
Named
.Po
.Sy red , blue , yellow , green , orange ,
.Sy purple
.Pq alias Sy violet ,
.Sy gray
.Pq alias Sy grey ,
.Sy navy , white
.Pc ,
hex
.Pq Sy #2563eb ,
or
.Sy none
(transparent).
.It Sy fg
Border/outline color.
Named, hex, or
.Sy none
(no border).
.It Sy text
Text color.
Named, hex, or
.Sy none
(hides text).
.It Sy border
.Sy solid | dashed | dotted .
.It Sy icon
Identifier or string.
Built-in identifiers
.Po
.Sy shield , warning , lock , plus the capacity-icon vocabulary
.Pc ;
custom: any identifier declared by a
.Sy symbol
declaration; inline: a double-quoted Unicode literal
.Pq Sy "\(rs"
\(em font-dependent.
.It Sy shadow
.Sy none Pq default | subtle | soft | hard .
.It Sy font
.Sy sans Pq default | serif | mono .
.It Sy weight
.Sy thin | light | normal Pq default | bold .
.It Sy italic
.Sy true | false Pq default .
.It Sy text-size
.Sy xs | sm | md Pq default | lg | xl .
.It Sy padding
.Sy none | xs | sm | md Pq default | lg | xl .
.It Sy spacing
.Sy none | xs | sm | md | lg | xl .
Default varies by entity.
.It Sy header-height
.Sy none | xs | sm | md Pq default | lg | xl .
Roadmap-only.
.It Sy corner-radius
.Sy none | xs | sm | md | lg | xl | full .
.It Sy bracket
.Sy none Pq default | solid | dashed .
Parallel-only.
.It Sy capacity-icon
Glyph used as the suffix to capacity numbers.
Built-in identifiers:
.Sy none ,
.Sy multiplier
.Pq default \(em "\(mu" ,
.Sy person ,
.Sy people ,
.Sy points
.Pq "\(em" ,
.Sy time
.Pq "\(em" .
Custom: any
.Sy symbol
id; inline: a double-quoted Unicode literal.
.It Sy timeline-position
.Sy top Pq default | bottom | both .
Roadmap-only.
.Sy both
mirrors the date strip at the chart bottom.
.It Sy minor-grid
.Sy true | false Pq default .
Roadmap-only.
When
.Sy true ,
draws faint dotted grid lines at every tick boundary.
.El
.Pp
Built-in icon names are rendered from a curated SVG library
shipped with the renderer, not from Unicode emoji codepoints.
This guarantees consistent visual output across every platform
(web, CLI, exports).
Authors who want platform-default emoji rendering use an inline
Unicode literal instead of the named identifier.
.Sh GRAMMAR
.Ss Universal declaration pattern
Every entity declaration follows the same shape:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
keyword [id] ["title"] [key:value ...]
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width "Identifier"
.It Sy Identifier
Unquoted, matches
.Sy [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_-]* .
Used for referencing.
Optional \(em auto-generated from the title (kebab-cased) if
omitted.
.It Sy Title
Double-quoted string.
Human-readable display name.
Optional.
Always double-quoted, even single-word titles \(em the quote is
how the parser distinguishes id from title.
.El
.Pp
At least one of
.Sy id
or
.Sy "title"
must be present.
Every other input is a keyed property using
.Sy key:value .
.Pp
The
.Sy nowline
directive is the only construct without an id or title; every
other declaration follows this pattern.
.Ss Identifiers
Identifiers match
.Sy [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_-]* \(em
letters, digits, underscores, and dashes, starting with a letter
or underscore.
They must be unique across the merged result (the file and all
its includes); items, parallel blocks, groups, anchors, persons,
teams, milestones, footnotes share one namespace.
.Pp
Idiomatic Nowline uses kebab-case but
.Sy authRefactor ,
.Sy auth_refactor ,
and
.Sy MED
are equally valid.
.Pp
When omitted, the parser generates one by slugifying the title to
kebab-case:
.Qq Audit log v2
becomes
.Sy audit-log-v2 .
.Ss Lists
Any list-typed property accepts a single value without brackets or
multiple values with bracket notation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
labels:enterprise
labels:[enterprise, security]
.Ed
.Pp
No quotes around identifiers in lists.
Comma-separated, optional spaces.
.Ss Dependencies
.Sy after:
and
.Sy before:
each accept a single identifier or a bracketed list.
References may target items, milestones, anchors, parallel
blocks, or groups.
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy after:id
\(em this entity starts after the referenced entity finishes (or
after the referenced anchor date).
.It
.Sy after:[id1, id2, ...]
\(em starts after
.Em all
referenced entities finish (i.e. after the latest of them).
.It
.Sy before:id
\(em this entity must finish before the referenced entity starts
(or before the referenced anchor date).
.It
.Sy before:[id1, id2, ...]
\(em finishes before the
.Em earliest
of the referenced entities starts.
.El
.Pp
Circular dependencies across the full graph (including every
element of list-form references) are a validation error.
.Ss Line continuation
A trailing
.Sq \e
means the next line continues the same declaration.
Indentation on the continuation line is cosmetic.
Only valid at the end of a property line \(em not inside strings
or comments.
Use
.Sq \e\e
for a literal backslash.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
item auth "Auth refactor" duration:2w status:in-progress \e
  owner:sam labels:[security,enterprise] \e
  link:https://github.com/acme/auth/issues/123 \e
  style:flagged
.Ed
.Ss Comments
.Bd -literal -offset indent
// This is a single-line comment

/* This is a
   multi-line comment */
.Ed
.Sh VALIDATION
The parser produces clear error messages with file position and
suggestions (fuzzy-match
.Qq did you mean X?
hints).
Rules group as follows; full prose lives in
.Pa specs/dsl.md .
.Ss Structural
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
Exactly one
.Sy roadmap
declaration per file (subject to
.Sy include
.Sy roadmap:
mode).
.It
All identifiers are unique across the merged result.
Parent wins on collision, with a warning.
.It
Every entity must have at least an identifier or a title (or
both).
.It
File structure must follow the section order:
.Sy nowline
directive (optional, first non-comment line),
.Sy include ,
.Sy config ,
.Sy roadmap .
.It
The
.Sy nowline
directive version must match
.Sy v\&\ed+ .
A version newer than the parser supports is an error identifying
the required version.
.It
At least one swimlane is required in the merged result.
.It
Indentation must be consistent within a file: spaces
.Em or
tabs, not both.
Mixed indentation is a parse error identifying the first offending
line.
.It
.Sy label ,
.Sy size ,
and
.Sy status
declarations must appear in the roadmap section.
Placing them before
.Sy roadmap
is an error.
.El
.Ss References
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
All elements of
.Sy after: ,
.Sy before: ,
and
.Sy on:
must resolve to declared identifiers within the merged scope.
.It
A
.Sy size:
or
.Sy status:
reference must resolve to a declaration that appears
.Em earlier in the file
(or in an earlier include).
Forward references are an error.
.It
No circular dependencies in
.Sy after / before
chains.
.El
.Ss Values
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy anchor date:
and dated
.Sy milestone date:
values are valid ISO 8601 dates
.Pq Pa YYYY-MM-DD , calendar-valid .
.It
.Sy duration:
and
.Sy scale:
values match the raw duration pattern
.Sy \&\ed+(\e.\ed+)?[dwmqy] .
.It
A
.Sy size
declaration's id must not match the raw duration pattern and must
not be a bare
.Sy d , w , m , q , y .
.It
Every
.Sy size
declaration must specify
.Sy effort: ;
the value must be a positive raw duration literal.
.It
.Sy capacity:
on a
.Sy swimlane
must be a positive integer or decimal (no percent form).
.Sy capacity:
on an
.Sy item
must be a positive integer, decimal, or percent literal.
.Sy capacity:
is not valid on
.Sy parallel
or
.Sy group .
.It
.Sy utilization-warn-at:
and
.Sy utilization-over-at:
must each be a positive percent literal, a positive decimal
fraction, or
.Sy none .
When both numeric thresholds are set,
.Sy warn-at \(<= over-at .
.It
.Sy capacity-icon:
value must be a built-in identifier
.Po
.Sy none , Sy multiplier , Sy person , Sy people , Sy points , Sy time
.Pc ,
an identifier matching a
.Sy symbol
declaration in scope, or a double-quoted Unicode literal.
Same contract for
.Sy icon: .
.It
.Sy remaining:
is either a percentage
.Pq Sy 0% \(en Sy 100%
or a single-eng effort literal.
When the literal exceeds total effort (computed percent
.Sy > 100% ) ,
the layout step emits a soft warning and clamps the painted bar
to 100% remaining; rendering is never blocked.
.El
.Ss Calendar
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy calendar:
on
.Sy roadmap
must be one of
.Sy business , full , custom .
.It
A
.Sy calendar
config block is only valid when the roadmap declares
.Sy calendar:custom .
.It
When
.Sy calendar:custom ,
all four
.Sy days-per-*
entries are required and must be positive integers.
.El
.Ss Roadmap start property
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy roadmap start:
must be a valid ISO 8601 date.
.It
If a file contains any
.Sy anchor
or any dated
.Sy milestone ,
.Sy start:
is required.
.It
Every anchor date and every dated milestone date must be on or
after
.Sy start: .
.El
.Ss Persons and teams
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
A
.Sy person
may be declared at most once in the merged file scope.
A declaration is identified by the presence of a title or any
keyed property on the line.
.It
A bare
.Sy person <id>
inside a
.Sy team
denotes membership and is valid with or without a separate
declaration.
.It
A bare
.Sy person <id>
at roadmap top level with no matching declaration anywhere is a
no-op (parser may emit a warning).
.El
.Ss Includes
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy include
paths must resolve to an existing
.Pa .nowline
file relative to the including file's directory.
.It
No circular includes.
.It
.Sy include
declarations appear before
.Sy config
and
.Sy roadmap
(after the
.Sy nowline
directive if present).
.It
Duplicate
.Sy include
of the same file in a single file is an error.
.It
.Sy config:
must be
.Sy merge , ignore , or isolate .
.Sy roadmap:
must be
.Sy merge , ignore , or isolate .
.It
On
.Sy config:isolate ,
.Sy style:
references within the isolated file must resolve within that
file's own config.
.It
On
.Sy roadmap:isolate ,
the included file must contain a
.Sy roadmap
declaration.
.It
For any
.Sy include
whose
.Sy roadmap:
mode is not
.Sy ignore ,
parent and child must agree on
.Sy start: \(em
both absent or both present with identical values.
A mismatch is an error reported on the parent's
.Sy include
line.
.El
.Ss Parallel and group
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy parallel
must contain at least 2 children.
A single-child parallel emits a warning.
.It
.Sy group
must contain at least 1 child.
.It
.Sy size , duration , remaining , capacity
are not valid on
.Sy parallel
or
.Sy group
(computed from children).
.It
.Sy parallel
is valid inside swimlane or group.
.Pp
.Sy group
is valid inside swimlane, parallel, or group.
.El
.Ss Defaults
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
The first positional argument after
.Sy default
must be one of:
.Sy item , label , swimlane , roadmap , parallel , group ,
.Sy milestone , footnote , anchor .
.It
Duplicate
.Sy default <entity>
declarations for the same entity type within a single file are
an error.
.It
A
.Sy default <entity>
that sets a banned property
.Pq see Sx CONFIG SECTION
is an error.
.El
.Ss Symbols
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
Every
.Sy symbol
declaration must specify a non-empty
.Sy unicode:"<string>" .
.It
.Sy ascii: ,
if present, must be a quoted string of length \(<= 3 ASCII
characters.
.It
A
.Sy symbol
id must not shadow a built-in icon name.
.It
A
.Sy symbol
reference
.Pq Sy icon:NAME or Sy capacity-icon:NAME
must resolve to a built-in or an earlier
.Sy symbol
declaration.
Forward references are an error.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
A complete
.Pa .nowline
file exercising the major language features:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nowline v1

include "shared/teams.nowline"

config

style enterprise "Enterprise readiness"
  bg: blue
  fg: navy
  text: white
  border: solid
  icon: shield

style risky
  border: dashed
  fg: orange

default item status:planned shadow:subtle
default label style:subtle corner-radius:full
default swimlane padding:sm spacing:none

roadmap platform-2026 "Platform 2026" \e
    author:"Acme Engineering" \e
    logo:"./brand/acme.svg" \e
    start:2026-01-06 scale:2w calendar:business

person sam "Sam Chen" link:https://github.com/samchen
person jen "Jennifer Wu"

team engineering "Engineering"
  team platform "Platform Team"
    person sam
    person jen
  team mobile "Mobile Team"

anchor kickoff date:2026-01-06
anchor code-freeze "Code Freeze" date:2026-05-01
anchor ga-date "GA Date" date:2026-06-01

size xs "Extra Small" effort:1d
size s  "Small"       effort:3d
size m  "Medium"      effort:1w
size l  "Large"       effort:2w
size xl "Extra Large" effort:1m

status awaiting-review "Awaiting Review"

label enterprise "Enterprise readiness" style:enterprise
label security  "Security hardening"   style:enterprise
label low-confidence                   style:risky

swimlane platform owner:platform capacity:5
  item auth-refactor "Auth refactor" size:l after:kickoff \e
    status:done owner:sam labels:enterprise capacity:3 \e
    link:https://github.com/acme/auth/issues/123
  parallel after:auth-refactor
    group audit-track "Audit Track" labels:security
      item audit-log "Audit log v2" size:xl before:code-freeze \e
        remaining:30% labels:[enterprise, security] capacity:2
        description "Comprehensive audit trail for admin actions"
      item audit-ui "Audit UI" size:m capacity:1
    item sso "SSO plugins" size:m \e
      labels:[enterprise, low-confidence] capacity:50%
  item platform-qa "Platform QA" size:s capacity:2

swimlane mobile owner:mobile capacity:2
  item offline "Offline mode" size:l after:kickoff owner:jen \e
    status:at-risk remaining:60% capacity:3
  item push-v2 "Push notifications v2" size:m owner:mobile capacity:1

milestone beta "Beta" after:auth-refactor
milestone v1-ga "v1 GA" after:[auth-refactor, audit-log]
milestone ga-launch "GA launch" date:2026-06-01 \e
    after:[auth-refactor, audit-log]

footnote "Vendor dependency" on:audit-log
  description "Blocked until vendor contract is signed."
footnote capacity-risk "Team capacity risk" on:[mobile, platform]
  description "Mobile team is down to 2 engineers through Q2."
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nowline 1
.Pq Sy man 1 nowline
.Pp
The
.Sy specs/
directory in the source repository documents the DSL grammar in
prose
.Pq Pa specs/dsl.md ,
the layout / rendering pipeline
.Pq Pa specs/rendering.md ,
the localization model
.Pq Pa specs/localization.md ,
and OSS milestones
.Pq Pa specs/milestones.md .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An The Nowline Authors Aq Mt maintainers@nowline.io
